Back to The King and I index
ACT ONE, SCENE ONE
On the boat bound for Bangkok
ORTON – Hello Laddy
LOUIS – How near are we to Bangkok Captain?
ORTON – See that cluster of lights jutting out into the river? That’s it. That’s Bangkok.
LOUIS – Oh look! All our boxes
ORTON – Aye, and a fair lot they are
LOUIS – We packed everything we had in our Singapore house – furniture and everything
LOUIS – Mother, look! There’s Bangkok! Do you see that cluster of lights that stick out into the river. That’s Bangkok.
ANNA – I see, Louis. I see them. It’s exciting isn’t it?
LOUIS – Will the King of Siam come down to the dock to meet us?
ANNA – The King himself? I don’t think so. Kings don’t as a rule.
ORTON – I wonder if you know what you’re facing Ma’am – an Englishwoman here in the East.
LOUIS – Look mother! Look at that boat!
Look at the dragon’s head in the bow.
ORTON – That’s the Royal barge.
LOUIS – Is that the King, the man sitting in the bow?
ORTON – That’s the Kralahome. Sort of Prime Minister – the King’s right hand man, you might say.
ANNA – Do you suppose he’s coming out to meet us?
ORTON – No doubt of it. Ma’am – if I might be allowed to offer you a word of warning….
ANNA – What is it Captain?
ORTON – That man has power and he can use it for you or against you.
ANNA – Oh, Captain, I don’t….
ORTON – I’m just telling you, Ma’am. I think you should know.
ANNA – Thank you Captain
LOUIS – Look mother! They’re closer! Mother! The Prime Minister is naked!
ANNA – Hush, Louis. He’s not naked. Well, he’s half naked.
LOUIS – They all look rather horrible, don’t they, mother? Father would not have liked us to be afraid.
ANNA – No Louis. Father would not have liked us to be afraid.
LOUIS – Mother, does anything ever frighten you?
ANNA – Sometimes
LOUIS – What do you do
ANNA – I whistle
LOUIS – Oh, that’s why you whistle.
ANNA – Yes, that’s why I whistle.

When ever I feel afraid I hold my head erect
And whistle a happy tune So no-one will suspect - I’m afraid.
While shivering in my shoes	I strike a careless pose
And whistle a happy tune And no one every knows I’m afraid.
The result of this deception Is very strange to tell
For when I fool the people I fear I fool myself as well.
I whistle a happy tune And every single time
The happiness in the tune Convinces me that I’m not afraid.
Make believe you’re brave And the trick will take you far
You may be as brave As you make believe you are. (whistle)
You may be as brave As you make believe you are.

LOUIS – I think that’s a good idea mother. A very good idea.
ANNA – It is a good idea, isn’t it
LOUIS – You know I don’t think I shall ever be afraid again.
ANNA – Good.
LOUIS – While shivering in my shoes	I strike a careless pose
And whistle a happy tune And no one ever knows I’m afraid
The result of this deception Is very strange to tell
For when I fool the people I fear I fool myself as well.
I whistle a happy tune And every single time
The happiness in the tune Convinces me that I’m not afraid
ANNA Make believe you’re brave
LOUIS And the trick will take you far
ANNA	You may be as brave
LOUIS As you make believe you are. (Whistle)
ORTON – Clear that away
Ma-am I wouldn’t whistle. The Kralahome might think it disrespectful.
ANNA – Oh was I whistling! Sorry I didn’t realise.
KRAL – Good evening Sir. Welcome to Siam.
you come with me now.
Your boxes are carried to Palace – later.
ANNA – No. Not to the Palace. I am not living at the Palace
KRALA – Who say?
ANNA – The King say. Says. The King has promised me twenty pounds a month and a house of my own.
KRALA – King cannot always remember what he promise. King very busy – this of small concern to him. I do not trouble king with matters of small concern.
ANNA – But all I want is ten minutes audience with him.
KRALA – King very busy now. New Year celebrations just finishing. Fireworks every night.
ANNA – And what am I to do in the meantime?
K – In the meantime – you wait – in Palace.
ANNA – Your Excellency. I will teach in the Palace, but I must have a house of my own – where I can go at the end of the day when my duties are over.
K – What you wish to do in evening that cannot be done in Palace?
ANNA – How dare you! I’m sorry your Excellency, but you don’t understand. I came here to work. I must support myself and my young son. And I shall take nothing less than what I have been promised.
K – You will tell King this?
ANNA – I will tell King this.
K – It will be very interesting meeting.
You come now. You come now, or you can stay on boat. I do not care!
ORTON – Ma’am if you wish to stay on my ship and return to Singapore…….
ANNA – No thank you Captain Orton. Your Excellency – I will go with you. I have made a bargain, and I shall live up to my part of it. But I expect a bargain to be kept on both sides. I shall go with you, Your Excellency.
K – To the Palace?
ANNA – For the time being. Goodbye Captain Orton – and thank you very much for everything. Louis……
LOUIS – Goodbye Captain
LOUIS – Look mother!





ACT ONE SCENE TWO
King’s Library in the Palace
King seated cross legged on Dais. Wearing Glasses. Reading letters, throws at Phra Alack – Dismisses Dancers. Picks up book, crosses the stage. Signals right to Kralahome to enter whilst walking wide circle to him.
KING --	Well, well well well
KRAL--	I have been meaning to speak with you about English Schoolteacher. She is waiting to see you
KING--	Takes of glasses. She is in Siam? How long?
KRAL--	Eases up to King. Two weeks, three weeks.. She has needed disciplining, your Majesty. She objects to living in the palace. Talks about house she say you promise her.
KING--	I do not recollect such a promise. Tell her I will see her. I will see her in a moment. See Lun Tha and goes up the Dais.
KRAL--	This is Lun Tha emissary from court of Burma
KING--	Ah yes. You are here for copying of famous Bangkok Temple. I have give permission
KRAL--	He bring present from Prince of Burma
KING--	Am I to trust a ruler of Burma. Am I to trust this present they send me or is she a spy?
TUPTIM--	I am not a spy…….
KING	crosses to Kr nods to Kr walks around Tuptim, signals approval to Kr and exits R
TUPTIM--	SONG
Three gongs sound king enters R preceeded by 2 amazons and mounts dais
TUPTIM--	Your majesty wishes me to leave?
KING – I will tell you when I wish you to leave.
KRAL – Madame Leonowens
KING – You are schoolteacher
ANNA – Yes, Your Majesty. When may I start work?
KING – I will tell you when I wish you to start.
ANNA – There is a matter we have to settle first, Your Majesty.
KING – You are part of general plan I have for bringing to Siam what is good on Western culture. Already I have bring printing press here – for printing.
ANNA – Yes, I know Your Majesty.
KING – How you know?
ANNA – Before I signed our agreement, I found out all I could about Your Majesty’s ambitions for Siam.
KING – Ha! This is scientific. You are pleased with your apartments in Palace?
ANNA – They…. are quite comfortable, Your Majesty… For the time being. But my young son and I have found it rather….confining….with Amazons guarding the doors and not permitting us to leave our quarters.
KING – Strangers cannot be allowed to roam around Palace before presentment to King. You could look out of windows.
ANNA – Yes, Your Majesty, we have done so. We have seen New Year celebrations, royal cremation ceremonies, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera…..
KING – Etcetera. What is this etcetera
ANNA – According to the dictionary, it means “and the rest” – all the things you have been doing while we have been waiting. The fireworks…..
KING – Best fireworks I ever see at funeral. How you like my acrobats?
ANNA – Splendid Your Majesty. Best acrobats I ever see at funeral.
KING – Ha! Have children prepare for presentation to schoolteacher.
ANNA – How many children have you, Your Majesty?



KING – I have only sixty-seven altogether.I begin very late. But you shall not teach all of them. You shall teach only children of mothers who are in favour with King.
Which at present are very few. Ah! Lady Thiang. Madame Leonowens. This is Lady Thiang, head wife.
THIANG – There is a happy land…..Miss on ary.
ANNA – A missionary taught you English.
THIAN – Yes sir. Mis son ary.
KING – Lady Thiang, you will help Madame Leonowens with her schoolteaching, and she in her turn, will teach you the better English.
ANNA – Your Majesty….?
KING – She is grateful to me for my kindness
ANNA – Oh I see, Your Majesty in our agreement, you…..
KING – You, Tuptim, you already speak well the English.
She arrive today. She is present to me from Burma prince.
ANNA – She….is a present?
TUPTIM – Madam you have English books I can read?
ANNA – Of course I have.
TUPTIM – I wish most to read book called The Small House of Uncle Thomas, is by American Lady, Harriet Beecha Stowa.
KING – A woman has written a book?
ANNA – A very wonderful book, your Majesty. An American book. All about slavery.
KING – Ha! President Lingkong against slavery, no. Me too. Slavery very bad thing.
I think you will teach my wives too – those wives who are in Royal favour.
ANNA – I shall be most happy to teach you wives, even thought that was not part of our agreement. Speaking of our agreement reminds me that there is one little matter, about my house.
KING – Also I will allow you to help me in my foreign correspondence.
ANNA – Yes, Your Majesty. I don’t think you understand. Your Majesty I don’t think you understand about my house…
KING – House? House? What is this about house?
ANNA – I want my house. The house you promised me, Your Majesty.
KING – You shall live in Palace. You teach in Palace, you shall live in Palace. If you do not live in palace, you do not teach, and you go – wherever you please. I do not care. You understand this?
ANNA – Yes, Your Majesty. But if these are the only terms on which I am allowed to remain….
KING – Enough! I have no more time to talk. Talk to other women, my women – my wives.
Exits stage R. Signals for Tuptim to follow him.
ANNA – For goodness sake! What is the matter? What are they trying to do to me?
THIANG – They think you wear big skirt like that because you shaped like that.
ANNA – Well, look, I’m not.
THIANG – They wish to know, sir, if you have children?
ANNA – One little boy.
THIANG –	I have boy, too – Crown Prince Chaufa Chululongkorn, heir to throne.
I would be happy if you would teach children.
ANNA – I would like to, very much. I came all the way here from Singapore to do so, but really under these conditions…..
THIANG – You could be great help to all here sir.
ANNA – Lady Thiang, why do you call me sir?
THIANG – Because you scientific. Not lowly, like woman.
ANNA – Do you all think women are more lowly than men? Well I don’t.
THIANG – Please sir do not tell King. Make King very angry.
ANNA – King seems to be angry already. That lovely girl – He said she was a present….
THIANG – From Prince of Burma. I think she love another man. If so, she will never see other man again.
ANNA – Poor child!
THIANG – Oh no, sir. She is foolish child, to wish for another man when she has King.
ANNA – But you can’t help wishing for a man, if he’s the man you want.
THIANG – It is strange for schoolteacher to talk so.
ANNA – Romantic! I suppose I am. I was very much in love with my late husband Tom.
THIANG – Tom.
ANNA – Once a woman has loved like that, she understands all other women who are in love…. And she’s on their side too, even if she’s just a schoolteacher.
ANNA – Yes……Tom
THIANG – He was pretty in face
ANNA – Oh dear, yes. He was very pretty in face.
When I think of Tom, I think about a night
When the earth smelled of summer and the sky was streaked with white
And the soft mist of England was sleeping on a hill
I remember this, and I always will….
There are new lovers now on the same silent hill
Looking on the same blue sea
And I know Tom and I are a part of them all,
And they’re all a part of Tom and me.

Hello young lovers, whoever you are,
I hope your troubles are few
All my good wishes go with you tonight
I’ve been in love like you.
Be brave, young lovers, and follow your star,
Be brave and faithful and true.
Cling very close to each other tonight
I’ve been in love like you.
I know how it feels to have wings on your heels,
And to fly down a street in a trance
You fly down a street on the chance that you’ll meet
And you meet, not really by chance.
Don’t cry young lovers whatever you do
Don’t cry because I’m alone
All of my memories are happy tonight,
I’ve had a love of my own.
I’ve had a love of my own, like yours,
I’ve had a love of my own.

KING	The children! The children! They come for presentment to schoolteacher.
ANNA	This is all very interesting, Your Majesty, but it has not solved my problem….
KING	Silence! You will stand here to meet royal children.
ANNA	Very well, Your Majesty.
KING	The royal princes and princesses!

(March of the Siamese Children)




ACT ONE SCENE THREE
Scene before curtain
King enters R at same time as Chula they cross C and King calls back Chula
KING --	Chulalongkorn	Chula bows before King
CH --	Father I shall be late for school
KING --	You wait Crosses Arms and looking forward – Please to recite proverb you have learned yesterday and writing down twelve times in your copybook.
PRINCE --	“A thought for the day; East West, Home is best”
KING --	East, West, home best. Crosses to CL. Home! Mean House. Every day for many many months! Always something about a house! then back to C Are my children to be taught nothing more.
PRINCE --	Yesterday we were taught that the world is a round ball which spins with a stick through the middle. Everyone knows that the world rides on the back of a great turtle, which keeps it from running into the stars.
KING --	Hands outstretched How can it be that every body know one thing turns to Chula if many people believe another thing?
PRINCE --	Copies King Then which is true?
KING --	Hesitates The world is round ball with stick through the middle. I believe.
PRINCE --	You believe? Then does this mean you do not know? Hesitates But you must know because you are King!
KING --	Arm around Chula leads him DR Someday you too will be King and you too will know turns Chula towards him everything.
PRINCE --	But how do I learn? And when do I know that I know everything.
KING --	When – you - are – King you will know. Now leave me!
When you are King! But I do not know. I am not sure. I AM NOT SURE OF ANYTHING!
KING --	When I was a boy. World was better spot
What was so was so. What was not was not
Now I am a man. World have changed a lot
Some things nearly so. Other nearly not

There are times I almost think I am not sure of what I absolutely know
Very often find confusion in conclusion I concluded long ago.
In my head are many facts, that, as a student I have studied to procure
In my head are many facts, of which I wish I was more certain I was sure

Is a puzzlement. What to tell a growing son

What for instance shall I say to him of women, shall I educate him on the ancient lines?
Shall I tell the boy as far as he is able, to respect his wives and love his concumbines?
Shall I tell him every one is like the other, and the better one of two is really neither?
If I tell him this I think he wont believe it, and I nearly think I don’t believe it either!

Shall I join with other nations in alliance, if allies are weak am I not best alone?
If allies are strong with power to protect me, might they not protect me out of all I own?
Is a danger to be trusting one another, one will seldom want to do what other wishes;
But unless someday somebody trust somebody, there’ll be nothing left on earth excepting fishes!

There are times I almost thing nobody sure of what he absolutely knows.
Everybody find confusion in conclusion he concluded long ago.
And it puzzles me to learn that tho a man may be in doubt of what he know
Very quickly will be fight…. He’ll fight to prove that what he does not know is so.

Ohhhhhhhhh. Sometimes I think that people going mad
Ahhhhhhhhh. Sometimes I think that people not so bad
But no matter what I think I must go on living life
As leader of my kingdom I must go forth
Be father to my children and husband to each wive
Etc. etc. etc. and so forth

Kneeling and praying
If my Lord in Heaven Buddha show the way,
Every day I try to live another day.
If my Lord in Heaven Buddha show the way,
Every day I do my best for one more day.	Rises up onto to my knees
But……….. Is a puzzlement.


ACT ONE SCENE FOUR
School room. Children singing – Anna conducting
ANNA – Now look. You’re all up in that corner. Now spread out children.
Now, that last line was “English words are all we speak”. That wasn’t very clear. I want to hear the beginnings and the ends of your words. Once again now, shoulders back, chins up, and nice big smiles, because this is your school song, and you love your school. Now come along – one, two, three.
Singing – Anna conducting
We work and work ------------- Our dear old school.
ANNA – That’s fine. Now take your places for class. You all know where you belong.
Lady Thiang – will you start.
THIANG – Blue is ocean. Red – Siam. Here is king of Siam.
In right hand is weapon, show how he destroy all who fight him.
Green – Burma. Here is King of Burma No clothes mean how poor is King of Burma.
ANNA – Thank you, Lady Thiang. Will you take my place? The map you have been looking at is an old one. Today we have a surprise. Louis, will you pull that cord for me? A new map, just arrived from England. It is a present to us from His Majesty your King.
All	The Lord of Light
ANNA – Er, yes, the Lord of light.
LOUIS – The white is Siam
PRINCE – Siam not so small!
ANNA – Hush, your Highness
LOUIS – Wait! Let me show you England. See? England is even smaller than Siam.
ANNA – For many years, before I came here, Siam was to me just like that little while spot. Now I have lived here for more than a year. I have met the people of Siam. I’m beginning to understand them.
PRINCESS – You like us?
ANNA –	I like you very much. Very much indeed.
CHILDREN Ah!
ANNA – It’s a very ancient saying but a true and honest thought,
That if you become a teacher, by your pupils you’ll be taught
As a teacher I’ve been learning, You’ll forgive me if I boast
And I’ve now become an expert, on the subject I like most
Getting to know you.
Getting to know you, getting to know all about you.
Getting to like you, getting to hope you like me.
Getting to know you, putting it my way, but nicely.
You are precisely, my cup of tea.
Getting to know you, getting to feel free and easy. When I am with you, getting to know what to say.
Haven’t you noticed? Suddenly I’m bright and breezy.
Because of all the beautiful and new, Things I’m learning about you Day, by day.
Dance etc etc etc

ANNA – My goodness! This started out to be a lesson! Now let’s get back to work. Now, are there any questions?
PRINCE – What is that green up there?
ANNA – That is Norway Nor way
WIVES – Nor- way
ANNA – Norway is a very cold place. It is sometimes so cold that the lakes and rivers freeze, and the water becomes so hard you can walk on it.
PRINCE – Walk on water?
ANNA – Yes, walk on water.
PRINCE – How is possible? Hard water!
ANNA – It is not only hard, but very slippery too. When people walk on it, they fall down, and slide….. Not only do the lakes and rivers freeze, but the raindrops, as they fall, are changed into small white spots that look like lace! This is called snow!
TUPTIM – Snow?
PRINCE – Spots of lace!
ANNA – Yes, Your Highness! The water freezes – on the way down from the sky.
PRINCE – And the raindrops turn into little stars.
ANNA – Yes, Your Highness. Some are shaped like stars – small, white.
PRINCESS – There’s not a word of truth in it.
YING – I do not believe such thing as snow!
PRINCE – And I do not believe Siam is so big.
PRINCE – And other countries so big.
CHULU – Siam biggest country in the world!
KING – What? What is this? How can schoolroom be so…..unscientific?
ANNA – Your Majesty, we have had a little misunderstanding. I was describing snow to them and they refused to believe that there was such a thing.
KING – Snow?
ANNA – Snow.
KING – Ah yes, from mountain top.
ANNA – From the sky.
KING – From sky to mountain top.
CHULU – Sire…..please….How does it come down from the sky?
KING – Like this.
CHULU – Thank you sire.
KING – I have seen pictures – Switzerland! Land all white, with snow.
ANNA – That’s right Your Majesty.
KING – Who does not believe this?
ANNA – Well, after all, they have never seen it.
KING – Never see? If they will beleive only what they see, why do we have schoolroom?
Rise – Do not ever let me hear of not believing schoolteacher whom I have bring here at great expense – twenty pounds – each month. Twenty English pounds!
Children must learn. Teacher must teach! Not waste time instructing children in silly English song – home sweet house. To remind me of breaking promises I never made, etc etc etc
ANNA – Your Majesty – you DID promise me a house. “A brick residence adjoining the Royal Palace” Those were your words in your letter.
KING – You will live in palace as is customary for servant.
ANNA – Oh no Your Majesty! No, Your Majesty indeed – I am not your servant.
CHULU – I would say your mother has bad manners.
LOUIS –	Oh you would would you? Well, I’d say your father has no manners at all.
ANNA – Louis! If you do not give me the house you promised me, I shall return to England.
VOICES – NO NO DO NOT GO TO ENGLAND
PRINCESS – We learn. We believe schoolteacher.
YING – I believe in snow
THIANG – Do not let her go away.
KING – I let her do nothing that is not my pleasure. It is my pleasure you stay here. You stay here in palace. In Palace!
ANNA – No, Your Majesty.
KING – I give you servants. I give you bigger room.
ANNA – That is not the point, Your Majesty.
KING – Why wish you to leave these beautiful children, all whom loving you so extraordinarily?
ANNA – I do not wish to leave them. I love them too – quite extraordinarily. But I cannot stay in a country where a promise has no meaning.
KING – I will hear no more about this promise.
ANNA – A land where there is talk of honour, and wish for Siam to take her place among the modern nations of the world! Where there is talk of great changes, but where everything still remains according to the wishes of the King!
KING – You will say no more! NO MORE
ANNA – I will say no more, because I have no more to say.


(We kiss in a shadow)
LUN	If only we could stop pretending
We kiss in the shadow, we hide from the moon
Our meetings are few, and over too soon.
We speak in a whisper, afraid to be heard;
When people are near, we speak not a word
Alone in our secret, together we sigh,
For one smiling day to be free
To kiss in the sunlight and say to the sky:
Behold and believe what you see!
Behold how my lover loves me!

LUN	Tuptim, when can we meet? When?
TUPTIM	It is not possible. We cannot meet alone ever – not ever.

We speak in a whisper, afraid to be heard.
When people are near we speak not a word
Alone in our secret, together we sigh
For one smiling day to be free

LUN/TUP	To kiss in the sunlight and say to the sky:
Behold and believe what you see. Behold how my lover loves me!
LUN	What is it?
TUPTIM	Someone was here!

I had a feeling someone was watching us.
Please go! Please!

To kiss in the sunlight, and say to the sky:
Behold and believe what you see! Behold how my lover loves me!



INTERMEDIATE SCENE
(Between and following Schoolroom – Act One, Scene Four)
Music – A Puzzlement
PRINCE	I am sorry we nearly fought just now
LOUIS	I am too
PRINCE	Are you really going away?
LOUIS	Mother plans to leave on the next sailing.
PRINCE	I am not sure my father will ALLOW your mother to go.
PRINCE	Why does not your mother admit that she was WRONG?
LOUIS	I don’t believe that mother thinks she was WRONG
PRINCE	It begins to look as if people do not know when they are right or wrong – even after they have grown up.
LOUIS	I have noticed that too.
PRINCE	A puzzlement! When I left my father a little while ago, I heard him talking to himself. He seemed uncertain about many things.
LOUIS	I don’t believe grown-ups are very certain – they only talk as if they’re certain.
PRINCE	There are times I almost think
They are not sure of what they absolutely know.
LOUIS	I believe they are confused about conclusions they concluded long ago.
PRINCE	If my father and your mother are not sure of what they absolutely know,
Can you tell me why they fight?
LOUIS	They fight to prove that what they do not know is so!
PRINCE	Ohhhhhhhhhhhh Sometimes I think that people going mad.
LOUIS	Ahhhhhhh Sometimes I think that people – not so bad.
PRINCE	But no matter what I think I must go on living life
And some day as a leader I must go forth
Be father to my children and husband to each wife
Etc etc and so forth.
If my lord in heaven, Buddha, show the way Every day I try to live another day
If my lord in heaven, Buddha, show the way	Every day I do my best for one more day.
But
LOUIS	Is a puzzlement.








ACT ONE SCENE FIVE
Anna’s bedroom
ANNA	YOUR SERVANT! YOUR SERVANT!
Indeed I’m not your servant
Although you give me less than servant’s pay
I’m a free and independent employe, employee
Because I’m a woman
You think, like every woman,
I have to be a slave or concubine
You conceited, self-indulgent libertine! Liberteeen
How I wish I’d called him that! Right to his face
Libertine!
And while we’re on the subject, sire
There are certain goings on around this place
That I wish to tell you I do not admire.
I do not like polygamy
Or even moderate bigamy
I realise that in your eyes
That clearly makes a prig o me
But I am from a civilized land called Wales
Where men like you are kept in county gaols
In your pursuit of pleasure you
Have mistresses who treasure you
They have no ken of other men beside whom they can measure you
A flock of sheep and you are the only ram
No wonder you’re the wonder of Siam.

I’m rather glad I DIDN’T say that – not with the women right there – and the children.

The children, the children
I’ll not forget the children
No matter where I go I’ll always see
Those little faces looking up at me.

Your Majesty!
Shall I tell you what I think of you?
You’re spoiled.
You’re a conscientious worker, but you’re spoiled.
Giving credit where it’s due, there is much I like in you
But it’s also very true that you’re spoiled!
Everybody’s always bowing to the King
Everybody has to grovel to the King.
By your Buddha you are blessed
By your ladies you’re caressed
But the one who loves you best
Is the King.

All that bowing and kow-towing
To remind you of your royalty
I find a most disgusting exhibition
I wouldn’t ask a Siamese cat to demonstrate his loyalty
By taking this ridiculous position.
How would you like it if you were a man
Playing the part of a toad
Crawling around on your elbows and knees
Eating the dust of the road!
Toads! Toads! All of your people are toads!
Yes, Your Majesty; No, Your Majesty
Tell us how low to go Your Majesty;
Make some more decrees, Your Majesty
Don’t let us up offour knees, Your Majesty
Give us a kick, if you please Your Majesty
Give us a kic, if you would your Majesty
Oh!!! THAT WAS GOOOOOD, YOUR MAJESTY!!!!!

ANNA	Who is it?
THIANG	Mrs Anna, it is I, Lady Thiang
ANNA	At this hour of the night – One moment Lady Thiang
THIANG	Mrs Anna, will you go to King?
ANNA	Now? Has he sent for me?
THIANG	No. But he would be glad to see you. He is deeply troubled man. No one has ever spoken to him as you did today in schoolroom.
ANNA	Lady Thiang, no one has ever behaved to me as His Majesty did today in the schoolroom.
THIANG	And there is more distressing thing. Our agents in Singapore have found letters to British Government from certain people whose greedy eyes are on Siam. They describe King as barbarian, and suggest making Siam protectorate.
ANNA	That is outrageous! He is many things I do not like, but he is not a barbarian.
THIANG	Then you will help him?
ANNA	You mean – advise him?
THIANG	It must not sound like advice. King cannot take advice. And if you go to him, he will not bring up subject. You must bring it up.
ANNA	I cannot go to him. It’s against all my principles. Certainly not without him having asked for me.
THIANG	He wish to be new-blood King with Western ideas. But it is hard for him, Mrs Anna. And there is something else – Princess Tuptim. I do not tell King this for his sake. This I will deal with in my own way. But for these other things, he need help, Mrs Anna.
ANNA	He has you.
THIANG	I am not scientific. He is great man. But he need special help. He need you………
ANNA	Lady Thiang, please don’t think I’m just being stubborn. But I cannot go to him. I will not.
THIANG	SOMETHING WONDERFUL

What more can I say to you
This is a man who thinks with his heart, his heart is not always wise
This is a man who stumbles and falls, but this is a man who tries
This is a man you’ll forgive and forgive. And help and protect, as long as you live…

He will not always say, what you would have him say
But now and then he’ll say – Something wonderful
The thoughtless things he’ll do, will hurt and worry you,
Then all at once he’ll do – Something wonderful.

He has a thousand dreams that won’t come true
You know that he believes in them and that’s enough for you
You’ll always go along, defend him when he’s wrong
And tell him, when he’s strong – He is wonderful
He’ll always need your love, And so he’ll get your love
A man who needs your love – Can be wonderful.

INTERMEDIATE SCENE Scene Five/Six

KRAL	Did you succeed? Will she go to him?
THIANG	She will go. She knows he needs her. Tell him.
KRAL	I will tell him she is anxious to come. I will tell him it is she who needs him.
THIANG	That also will be true. This woman knows many things but this I think she does not know.
She’ll always go along
Defend him when he’s wrong
And tell him when he’s strong
He is wonderful.
He’ll always need her love
And so he’ll get her love
A man who needs your love
Can be wonderful.

ACT ONE SCENE SIX

King’s Library. King is walking up and down impatiently (waiting for Mrs Anna) when he sees her coming he lies on the floor and pretends to resume reading the bible.

ANNA	Your Majesty Your Majesty	Your Majesty is reading the bible?
King pretends not to hear and reads more closely. Pretends great surprise.
KING	Ah! Mrs Anna. I think your Moses shall have been a fool.
ANNA	Moses?
KING	Moses. Yes Moses! Here it stands written by him that the world was created in six days! Closes bible….You know and I know it took many ages to create world. I think he shall have been a fool to have written so. To front What is your opinion?
ANNA	Your Majesty, the bible was not written by men of science, but by men of faith.
It was their explanation of the miracle of creation, which is the same miracle – whether it took six days or many centuries.
KING	Hmmm You have come to apologise?
ANNA	I am sorry your Majesty, but………
KING	Good! You apologise
ANNA	Your Majesty, I…
KING	I accept!
ANNA	Your Majesty, nothing that has been said can alter the fact that, in my country, anyone who makes a promise must……
KING	Silence - Do you have any respect for me?
Why do you stand over my head? I cannot stand all the time. And in this country no one’s head shall be higher than King’s. From now on in presence you should conduct yourself like all other subjects.
ANNA	You mean on the floor! I am sorry, Your Majesty. I shall try very hard not to let my head be as high as your Majesty’s. But I simple cannot grovel on the floor. I couldn’t possibly work that way – or think!
KING	You are very difficult woman. But you will observe care that head shall never be higher than mine. If I shall sit, you shall sit. If I shall kneel, you shall kneel etc etc etc.
ANNA	Very well, Your Majesty.
KING	Is promise?
ANNA	Is promise.
KING	Good. Tonight my mind is on very important matters.
ANNA	Anything you want to discuss with me?
KING	Why would I discuss important matters with woman?
ANNA	Very well, Your Majesty. I shall go back to my room. May I say goodnight? (curtsey)
KING	Goodnight!
ANNA	Your Majesty
KING	What what?
ANNA	I was wondering. When the boat arrived from Singapore yesterday – Was there any news from abroad?
KING	News! Yes, there are news! They call me barbarian.
ANNA	Who?
KING	Certain parties who would wish to use this as excuse to steal my country. Suppose, you were Queen Victoria and somebody tell you King of Siam is barbarian. Do you believe?
ANNA	Well, I…
KING	You will! You will! You will believe that I am barbarian – because – there is no one to speak otherwise.
ANNA	But this is a lie!
KING	It is a false lie!
ANNA	What have you decided to do about it?
KING	You guess!
ANNA	Well, if someone were sending a big lie about me to England, I should do my best to send the truth to England. Is that what you have decided to do, Your Majesty?
KING	Yes. That is what I have decided to do. But how? You guess how I shall do this!
ANNA	Well, my guess would be that when Sir Edward Ramsay arrives here –
KING	Ramsay? Ramsay?
ANNA	The British Diplomat.
KING	Ah yes – on way from Singapore. When he is here, I shall take opportunity of expressing my opinion of English thieves who wish to steal Siam. I shall show him who is barbarian!
What is this face you put on?
ANNA	Well, Your Majesty, my guess is that you will not fight with Sir Edward. You will entertain him and his party in an especially grand manner. Then they will return to England and report to the Queen that you are not a barbarian.
KING	Naturally….. naturally! That is what I shall have intended to do.
ANNA	This is the only way to get the better of the British. Stand up to them. Put your best foot forward. This is just an expression, Your Majesty. It means….dress up in your best clothes. Show them your most intelligent men, your most beautiful women. Edward admires beautiful women….
KING	Edward? You call him this?
ANNA	We are old friends. I knew him in Bombay, before I was married.
KING	Ah! But shall it be proper for the British dignitary to see my women with no shoes on their feet? Shall it be proper for them to put their best bare feet forward? No! Sir Ramsay will go back and tell Queen Victoria I am barbarian. Why do you not think of this?
ANNA	We shall dress them up, European fashion.
KING	You mean… dress them in dresses.
ANNA	How many women can I have to sew for me?
KING	All women in kingdom. How many dresses?
ANNA	That depends on how many ladies are chosen by Your Majesty.
KING	You shall tell me which of my women are most like Europeans, for dressing like same.
WAKE UP WAKE UP everybody! Wives! Etcetera, etc etc
You shall educate them in European custom and manners for presentation.
ANNA	I wonder how much time we shall have.
KING	Sir Ramsay’s gunboat last reported off Songkla. How long he take depend on how many ports he call into. Let us say we have one week.
ANNA	One week! Your Majesty, one week
KING	In this time whole world was created – MOSES say! Are there any details I do not think of so far?
ANNA	You must give them a fine dinner – a European dinner.
KING	I was going to.
ANNA	And a ball. With music.
KING	Music. And dancing!
ANNA	Yes, Your Majesty. And dancing!
KING	Why do you not think of dancing?
ANNA	It’s an inspired idea, Your Majesty. And we can give them a play. Tuptim has written a version of Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
KING	Ha! We shall give them theatrical performance. We shall show them who is barbarian! Line up, line up. Lady Thiang! On Saturday next at nine o’clock post meridian we shall give fine dinner – European dinner. For the next week, the men and women of my kingdom will work without sleeping till all is ready. Everyone must know this Lady Thiang. Tell this to everybody. Above all I must not be disturbed by anything.
ANNA	Look your Majesty!
KING	Fireworks! Fireworks at this hour of the morning! No one may order fireworks but me.
KRALA	Your Majesty, the British! The Gunboat!
KING	They attack?
KRAL	No! They salute, and we answer with fireworks. It is Sir Edward Ramsay and his party.
ANNA	Now?
KRAL	Now! They must have come direct from Songklah. No stops.
ANNA	No stops! Your Majesty…
KING	Tell them to go back. We are not ready!
ANNA	Still we do it, Your Majesty – you can do it.
KING	Ha! When English arrive we shall put them – to bed. Tomorrow morning we shall send them on sightseeing trip.
ANNA	We shall start now, this minute. Work work We have only 18 hours, but I shall do it somehow!
KING	I shall do it. You shall help me.
ANNA	Yes, Your Majesty.
KING	No one shall sleep tonight or tomorrow. We shall work even when the sun shines in the middle of the day. We shall….. Sees monks arrive in the back and beckons them
Ah Monks! Come, come. Come down.
First we shall ask help from Buddha. Bow to him King kneels Anna stands DR
Bow! Anna looks at King and signals who me? King nods. Anna drops head. King claps. Music stops
KING/all	Namo Tassa Bhagavato, Arahato, Sama Sambuddhasa Monks chant with the King
Oh Buddha, give us the aid of your strength and your wisdom All repeat
During this King signals to Mrs Anna to kneel by nodding to her
Buddham Saranam Gatchami Monks chant with the King
And help us to prove to the visiting English that we are extraordinary & remarkable people
All repeat
Dhamam Saranam Gatchami Monks chant with King
Help also Mrs Anna to keep awake for the scientific sewing of dresses, even though she be only a woman, and a Christian, and therefore unworthy of your interest All repeat
Anna looks up in surprise at the mention of her name. And gets up to cross to King to protest. “But your Majesty”
A promise is a promise! Your head shall never be higher than mine. A promise!
Anna sinks to her knees next to the King
During repeat. Orchestra starts to play “Something Wonderful”
Sangham Saranam Gatchami Monks chant with King
I promise you I shall give this unworthy woman a house – a house of her own – a brick residence adjoining the royal palace, according to agreement, etc. etc. etc. All repeat
King shushes Anna’s thanks during the repeat
During the repeat King and Anna play a bowing game ending with last etc. when they turn to each other and smile.


ACT TWO SCENE ONE
Reception room at Palace
THIANG WIVES SONG – WESTERN PEOPLE FUNNY

THIANG	Ladies! Ladies! Clear everything away! Quickly Now!
WIFE 9	Lady Thiang, what is this costume? Here is East, here is West
THIANG	Have too much work to do! Cannot move fast in swollen skirt.
WIFE 1	Lady Thiang, why must we dress like this for British?
THIANG	Whatever Mrs Anna wants us to do is wise and good, but this—is a puzzlement
To prove we’re not barbarians they dress us up like savages
To prove we’re not barbarians we wear a funny skirt
WIVES	To prove we’re not barbarians they dress us up like savages
To prove we’re not barbarians we wear a funny skirt
THIANG	Western People funny, Western People funny
Western People funny, of that there is not doubt
They feel so sentimental about the Orient,
They always have to turn us
Upside down and inside out.
WIVES	Upside down and inside out.
THIANG	To bruise and pinch our little toes
Our feet are cramped in leather shoes
They’d bread if we had brittle toes
But now they only hurt
Ah……………………….h!
WIVES	To bruise and pinch our little toes
Our feet are cramped in leather shoes
They’d bread if we had brittle toes
But now they only hurt
Western People funny, Western People funny
Western People funny, of that there is not doubt
THIANG	They think they civilise us whenever they advise us
To learn to make the same mistake that they are making too.
WIVES	They think they civilise us whenever they advise us
To learn to make the same mistake that they are making too.
ALL	THEY MAKE QUITE A FEW
ANNA ENTERS AFTER SONG
ANNA	Lady Thiang, here are the napkins for the dinner. Will you put them on the table?
THIANG	Thank you
ANNA	Thank YOU. Now ladies, let me see how you look. Very pretty. Now turn around and get ready for your curtsey. Oh my goodness gracious!
KING	What shall be trouble now?
ANNA	I forgot! They have no – undergarments!
KING	Undergarments? Of what importance are undergarments at this time?
ANNA	Of great importance, your Majesty.
KING	Are you wearing undergarments?
ANNA	Of course, Your Majesty!
KING	That a woman has no legs is useless to pretend. What is purpose of swollen skirt?
ANNA	The wide skirt is symbolic. It is the circle within which a female is protected.
KING	This is necessary? Englishmen are so aggressive.
ANNA	I said it was symbolic.
KING	These undergarments they are devised in symbolic and ornamental manner yes?
ANNA	Sometimes.
KING	Ah! This is what you are going to wear?
ANNA	Why yes, Your Majesty. Do you like it?
KING	This is what all the other visiting ladies shall look like?
ANNA	Most of them I believe.
KING	You are certain this is customary? Etc Etc Etc
ANNA	Yes I am certain it is customary. What is so extraordinary about bare shoulders? Why, your own ladies…
KING	Ah yes, but is different. They do not wear so many coverings up on other parts of body and therefore
ANNA	Therefore what?
KING	Is different
ANNA	I am sorry His Majesty does not approve.
KING	I do not say I do not approve, but I do say
PHRA	ALAK	Your Majesty the English. They are in Palace.
WIFE 9	Oh Evil Eye, Evil Eye.
ANNA	Ladies! Ladies! Come back! Don’t. Come back. Oh, dear! Edward! Oh this is dreadful.
KING	I see my ladies have not been educated in English custom of spying glass?
SIR ED	Oh my monocle. Was that what frightened them? Hello, Anna, my dear.
KING	Who? Who is this who arrives unannounced?
ANNA	Your Majesty, may I present Sir Edward Ramsay?
SIR ED	Your Majesty
KING	I am sorry sir my ladies have not given good impression.
SIR ED	On the contrary, Your Majesty, I have never received so good an impression in so short a time. You have most attractive pupils, Anna.
KRAL	Your Majesty, dinner is about to be served, but I would first like to present your guests to you in the – reception room.
KING	Ah yes, Dinner, yes this will be very entertaining.
ANNA	You have met?
KRAL	Your Excellency
KING	exiting Sir Edward I am interested in your views on missionaries. They say God will be angry with those that do not believe them – Is he a good God if he gets angry? They tell us that your bible is true and we tell them our books are true. Why do they not believe us if they expect us to believe them?






ACT TWO SCENE TWO
THIANG	Princess Tuptim, dinner is over. King and his English guests are on way to theatre pavilion. Should you not be there to begin your play?
TUPTIM	I came out here to memorise my lines.
THIANG	I think not princess. In have seen you and Lun Tha together. I do not tell King. For his sake. I do not wish to hurt him. But your lover will leave Siam tonight.
TUPTIM	Tonight?
THIANG	Now go to the theatre Princess.
LUN THA	Tuptim.
TUPTIM	Turn back and go the other way. I am here in the shadow of the wall. I will stay here until she turns the corner. She says you will leave Siam tonight, but I do not believe her.
LUN	It is true Tuptim. They have ordered me on the first ship that leaves for Burma, and it is tonight.
TUPTIM	What will we do?
LUN	You are coming with me-!
TUPTIM	I
LUN	Secret Police will all be at Theatre. Meet me here, after your play. Everything is arranged.
TUPTIM	I cannot believe it.
LUN	I can. It will be just as I have pictured it a million times.
I have dreamed that your arms are lovely
I have dreamed what a joy you’ll be
I have dreamed every work you’ll whisper
When you’re close, close to me.
How you look in the glow of evening
I have dreamed and enjoyed the view
In these dreams I’ve loved you so
That by now I think I know
What it’s like to be loved by you
I will love being loved by you.
TUPTIM	Alone and awake I’ve looked at the stars
The same that smiled on you
And time and again I’ve though all the things
That you’ve been thinking too.
I have dreamed that your arms are lovely
I have dreamed what a joy you’ll be
I have dreamed every work you’ll whisper
When you’re close, close to me.
How you look in the glow of evening
I have dreamed and enjoyed the view
In these dreams I’ve loved you so
That by now I think I know
TUP/LUN	What it’s like to be loved by you
I will love being loved by you.
ANNA	Tuptim
TUPTIM	Mrs Anna
ANNA	Tuptim, they are looking for you at the theatre. I guessed you were both here. I ran out to warn you. I think you’re being reckless.
TUPTIM	Yes I will go. I must say goodbye to you now Mrs Anna.
ANNA	Gracious! Anyone would think that she never expected to see me again.
LUN THA	Mrs Anna, we are leaving tonight.
ANNA	Leaving? How?
LUN THA	Do not ask me how. It is better you do not know. We shall never forget you Mrs Anna. Never!
ANNA	God bless you both.
I know how it feels to have wings on your heels
And fly down the street in a trance
You fly down the street on a chance that you’ll meet
And you meet, not really by chance.
Don’t cry young lovers, whatever you do
Don’t cry because I’m alone
All of my memories are happy tonight
I’ve had a love of my own
I’ve had a love of my own like yours
I’ve had a love of my own!

ACT TWO SCENE THREE

The Ballet
TUPTIM	Your Majesty. And honourable guests. I beg to put before you “Small house of Uncle Thomas”.
CHORUS	Small house of Uncle Thomas
Small house of Uncle Thomas
Written by a woman Harriet Beecher Stowa.
TUPTIM	House is in Kingdom of Kentucky, ruled by the most wicked king of all America, Simon of Legree. Your Majesty I beg to put before you loving friends Uncle Thomas
CHORUS	Dear Uncle Thomas
TUPTIM	Little Eva
CHORUS	Blessed little Eva
TUPTIM	Little Topsy
CHORUS	Mischief maker Topsy
TUPTIM	Happy People
CHORUS	Very happy people
LOVING FRIENDS DANCE
TUPTIM	Happy People! Happy People!
Your Majesty, I beg to put before you one who is not happy, the slave Eliza.
CHORUS	Poor Eliza, Poor Eliza. Poor unfortunate slave
TUPTIM	Eliza’s Lord and Master,
King Simon of Legree
She hates her lord and master and fears him
This king has sold her lover to far away province of Oheeo.
Lover’s name is George.
CHORUS	George
TUPTIM	Baby in her arms also called George
CHORUS	George
TUPTIM	So she bid goodbye to friends, and start on her escape

THE JOURNEY
TUPTIM	The escape
CHORUS	Run Eliza, run Eliza. Run from Simon
TUPTIM	Poor Eliza running, and run into a rain storm.
Comes a mountain.
CHORUS	Climb Eliza
TUPTIM	Hide Eliza
CHORUS	Hide from Simon. Hide in forest
1ST GIRL	Poor Eliza
2nd GIRL	Poor Eliza
3rd GIRL	Poor Eliza
ALL GIRLS	Poor Eliza, Poor Eliza, Poor Eliza
TUPTIM	Eliza very tired
Your Majesty, I regret to put before you King Simon of Legree

SIMON OF LEGREE
TUPTIM	Because one slave has run away
Simon beating ev’ry slave
Simon clever man
He decide to hunt Eliza, not only with soldiers, but with scientific dogs who sniff and smell, and thereby discover all who run from King.

THE CHASE
CHORUS	Run, Eliza, run. Run Eliza run.
Run from Simon, run.
Run Eliza, run, run
Run from Simon, run, run
Poor Eliza. Run from Simon
Eliza run, Eliza run from Simon. Run
Eliza run.
TUPTIM	Poor Eliza
CHORUS	Eliza run from Simon, run.
Run Eliza, run from Simon
Run Eliza.
Run from Simon
Run Eliza, run, run ahhhhhh

TUPTIM	Eliza come to river. Eliza come to river
CHORUS	Poor Eliza
TUPTIM	Who can save her?
CHORUS	Only Buddha, Buddha, Buddha, Buddha
Save her Buddha
Save her Buddha, save her
What will Buddha do?

TUPTIM	Buddha make a miracle!
Buddha send an angel down. Angel make the wind blow cold. Make the river water hard, hard enough to walk upon.
CHORUS	Buddha make a miracle! Praise to Buddha

TUPTIM	Angle show her how to walk on frozen water.

ICE SKATING DANCE
Now as token of his love, Buddha make a new miracle.
CHORUS	Praise to Buddha
TUPTIM	Send from heaven stars and blossoms
CHORUS	Praise to Buddha
TUPTIM	Send from heaven stars and blossoms
CHORUS	Praise to Buddha
TUPTIM	Look like lace upon the sky
CHORUS	Praise to Buddha
Praise to Buddha; praise to Buddha; praise to Buddha

TUPTIM	So Eliza cross the river, hidden by this veil of lace
Forgot to tell you name of miracle: Snow
Of a sudden she can see – Wicked Simon of Legree
Sliding cross the river fast.
With his bloodhounds and his slaves

What has happened to the river? Buddha has called out the sun!

CHORUS	Buddha has called out the sun!
Sun has made the water soft
Wicked Simon and his slaves
Fall in river and are drowned.

TUPTIM	On other side of river is pretty city, Canada, where Eliza sees lovely small house. Guess who live in house? Uncle Thomas.
CHORUS	Dear old Uncle Thomas.
TUPTIM	Little Eva
CHORUS	Blessed little Eva
TUPTIM	Little Topsy
CHORUS	Mischief maker Topsy
TUPTIM	Lover George
CHORUS	Faithful lover, George
TUPTIM	Who is looking like Angel to Eliza
They have all escaped from Wicked Simon and make happy reunion

HAPPY REUNION DANCE
TUPTIM	Topsy glad that Simon die, Topsy dance for joy
I tell you what Harriet Beecher Stowa say that Topsy
Topsy say
I specks I’se de wickedest critter in de world!
But I do not believe that Topsy is wicked critter. Because I too am glad for death of King. Of any King who pursues a slave who is unhappy and wish to join her lover. And your Majesty, I wish to say to you…… Your Majesty, and honourable guests! I will tell you end of story. Is very sad ending. Buddha has saved Eliza. But with the blessings of Buddha also come sacrifice.

CHORUS	Poor little Eva. Poor little Eva, Poor unfortunate child!

TUPTIM	Is Buddha’s wish that Eva come to him and thank him personally for saving of Eliza and baby. And so she die and go to arms of Buddha

CHORUS	Praise to Buddha, praise to Buddha





ACT TWO SCENE FOUR
The King’s library
Anna sitting on pile of books
SIR ED KING
SIR ED	I think now, with your permission, I should take my leave.
Goodbye Anna, my dear. It was lovely to see you again.
ANNA	Goodbye Edward
Well, your Majesty…
KING	It is all over
ANNA	May I remove my shawl? It is a very hot night. I am so pleased about everything.
KING	I am aware of your interest. I wish to say you have been of great help to me in this endeavour. I wish to make gift. I hope you will accept. Put it on finger
Put it on, put it on.
ANNA	Your Majesty, I do not know what to say!
KING	When one does not know what to say, it is the time to be silent!
A white elephant has been discovered in forests of Ayuthia.
ANNA	You regard this as a good omen, don’t you?
KING	Yes. Everything going well with us.
ANNA	Everything going well with us.
KING	Who who who
KRAL	It is I Your Majesty
KING	Wait wait wait	Come in come in
KRAL	Your Majesty
KING	Well, well well
KRAL	Secret police are here. They would make report to you.
KING	You will wait here
ANNA	Secret police…
KRAL	Your finger shines.
ANNA	Yes, The King. I did not know what to say. Women in my country don’t accept such gifts from men. Of course, he is the King. Actually it places me in rather an embarrassing position. I was intending to ask him for a rise in salary. And now…
KRAL	And now it will be difficult to ask.
ANNA	Very. I don’t suppose you would speak to him for me – about my rise in salary, I mean.
KRAL	I think I shall do this for you, because this is a strange world in which men and women can be very blind about things nearest to them.
ANNA	Thank you, Your Excellency. I don’t understand what you mean, but.
KRAL	No, but that does not matter. And I do not think he will raise your salary anyway.
KING	Ha! Good news and bad news come together. You will please stay up all night until we have further report on item of Tuptim.
KRAL	I had intended to do so, Your Majesty.
ANNA	Perhaps I had better go too.
KING	No no no. I wish to talk with YOU
ANNA	Is there something wrong with Tuptim?
KING	I do not know, nor do I consider this the most important thing I must tell you. It is of greater interest that the English think highly of me. Secret police have served coffee after dinner, and listen what they talk, and report conversation to me.
ANNA	You have been spying on your guests?
KING	How else can you find the truth. It appears I have made excellent impression. It is clear they do not think me barbarian.
ANNA	This is what you intended to prove.
KING	What WE intended to prove. Tuptim.
ANNA	What about her?
KING	She is missing from Palace. YOU know something of this?
ANNA	The last time I saw her, she was in the theatre pavilion.
KING	That is last time anyone has seen her. She never speaks to you of running away?
ANNA	I knew she was unhappy.
KING	Why unhappy? She is in palace of King. What greater honour for young girl than to be in palace of King?
ANNA	Your Majesty…if Tuptim is caught – shall she be punished?
KING	Naturally. What would you do if you were King – like me?
ANNA	I believe I would give her a chance to explain. I think I would try not to be too harsh.
KING	Hmmmph.
ANNA	Your Majesty, of what interest to you is one girl like Tuptim. She is just another woman, as a bowl of rice is just another bowl of rice, no different from any other bowl of rice.
KING	Now you understand about women. But British poets. Ha!
ANNA	You have been reading poetry, Your Majesty?
KING	Out of curiosity over strange idea of love, etc etc. I tell you this poetry is nonsense, and a silly complication of a pleasant simplicity.
A woman is a female who is human
Designed for pleasing man, the human male
A human male is pleased by many women
And all the rest you hear is fairy tale
ANNA Then tell me how this fairy tale began sir
You cannot call it just a poet’s trick
Explain to me why many men are faithful
And true to one wife only
KING	They are sick!
ANNA	But you DO expect WOMEN to be faithful.
KING	Naturally
ANN	Why naturally!
KING	Because it is natural. It is like old Siamese rhyme:
A girl must be like a blossom With honey for just one bee
A must must live like honey bee	And gather all he can
To fly from blossom to blossom	The honey bee must be free
But blossom must not ever fly	From bee to bee to bee
ANNA	You consider this SENSIBLE poetry Your Majesty
KING	Certainly. But listen to this, from your own poet Alf-red Tenny-sone
Now folds the Lily all her sweetness up and slips into the bosom of the lake
So fold thyself me dearest, thou and slip into my bosom
English girls are so - acrobatic
ANNA	Your Majesty I don’t know if I can ever make it clear to you…. We do not look on women as just human females. They are….well take yourself for instance, you are not just a human male.
KING	I am King
ANNA	Exactly. So every man is a king and every woman a queen, when they love one another.
KING	This is sickly idea.
ANNA	It is a beautiful idea, Your Majesty. We are brought up with it of course, and a young girl at her first dance –
KING	Young girl? They dance too? Like I see tonight? In arms of men not their husbands?
ANNA	Why yes.
KING	I would not permit it.
ANNA	It’s very exciting when you’re young, and you’re sitting on a small gilt chair, your eyes cast down, terrified that you’ll be a wallflower. Suddenly, you see two black shoes – white waistcoat – a face – and it speaks:
We’ve just been introduced,
I do not know you well,
But when the music started Something drew me to your side.
So many men and girls,
Are in each other’s arms
It made me think we might be, similarly occupied.
Shall we dance?
On a bright cloud of music shall we fly?
Shall we dance?
Shall we then say goodnight and mean goodbye?
Or perchance,
When the last little star has left the sky
Shall we still be together with our arms around each other
And shall you be my new romance?
On the clear understanding that this kind of thing can happen
Shall we dance, shall we dance shall we dance.

KING	Why do you stop? You dance pretty. Go on go on!
ANNA	Your Majesty, I – I didn’t realise I was – after all, in my country a girl would not dance while a man was looking on.
KING	But she will dance with strange man, holding hands etc etc
ANNA	Yes. Not always a strange man. Sometimes a very good friend.
KING	Good. We dance together. You show me. You teach you teach you teach.
ANNA	It’s very simple the polka. It goes one two three and one two three and one two three and
Shall we dance
KING	One two three and
ANNA	On a bright cloud of music shall we fly
KING	One two three and
ANNA	Shall we dance
KING	One two three and
ANNA	Shall we then say goodnight and mean goodbye
KING	One two three and
Or perchance when the last little star has leave the sky
ANNA	Shall we still be together with our arms around each other
And shall you be my new (king sings) romance
On the clear understanding that this kind of thing can happen
BOTH	Shall we dance, shall we dance, Shall we dance
ANNA	One two three and
KING	One two three, one two three. What is wrong? I know I know I forget and. This time I remember.
BOTH	One two three and one two three and one two three and
ANNA	That’s splendid your Majesty
KING	Splendid. One two and. You have thrown me off count
One two three and one two three and but this is not right.
ANNA	Yes it is. You were doing
KING	No no no. Is not right. Not the way I see Europeans dancing tonight.
ANNA	Yes it was. It was just like that.
KING	No. Were not holding two hands like this.
ANNA	Oh No as a matter of fact
KING	Was like this. No?
ANNA	Yes.
KING	Come!
KING	Come we do it again.
GONG
KRALA	Your Majesty
KING	Why do you burst through my door without waiting?
KRAL	We have found Tuptim.
KING	Where is she?
KRAL	Secret police are questioning her.
ANNA	Now you have found her, what will you do with her?
KING	I will do – what is usually done in such event
ANNA	What is that?
KING	When it happens you will know.
TUPTIM	Mrs Anna, Mrs Anna. Do not let them beat me. Do not let them.
KRAL	She was found on Chinese sailing ship. See! She wears disguise of religious student.
KING	Who gave you this robe? Who who who?
KRAL	It is believed she was running away with man who bring her here from Burma.
KING	Dishonour. Dishonour. Dishonour
KRAL	He was not found on boat.
KING	Where is this man?
TUPTIM	I do not know.
KING	You will tell us where we will find him. You will tell us.
TUPTIM	I do not know
KRAL	It is believed you were lovers with this man
TUPTIM	I was not lovers with this man
KING	Dishonour. We will soon have truth of this man. Hoi!
TUPTIM	Mrs Anna
ANNA	Stop that? Do you hear me? Stop it.
KING	It would be better if you understand at once that this matter does not concern you.
ANNA	But it does. It does, not only because of her, but even more because of you.
KING	You waste my time.
ANNA	She’s only a child. She was running away because she was unhappy. Can’t you understand that. Your Majesty, I beg of you, don’t throw away everything you have done. This girl hurt your vanity. She didn’t hurt your heart. You haven’t got a heart. You’ve never loved anyone. You never will.
KING	I show you. Give! Give to me!
ANNA	I cannot believe you are going to do this dreadful thing.
KING	You do not believe, eh? Maybe you will believe when you hear her screaming as you run down the hall.
ANNA	I’m not going to run down the hall. I’m going to stand here and watch you!
KING	Hold this girl. I do this all myself.
ANNA	You are a barbarian!
KING	Down down down Am I King or am I not King. Am I to be cuckold in my own palace? Am I to take orders from English schoolteacher?
ANNA	No, not orders
KING	Silence. I am King as I was born to be and Siam to be governed in my way. Not English way, not French way, not Chinese way, my way. Barbarian you say. There is no barbarian worse than a weak King and I am strong King. You hear? Strong. Exit
PHRA ALAK	The man the lover has been found. He is dead.
TUPTIM	Dead – then I shall join him soon. Soon.
ANNA	I shall never understand you – you or your King. I shall never understand him.
KRAL	You! You have destroyed him. You have destroyed King. He cannot be anything that he was before. You have taken all this away from him. You have destroyed him. You have destroyed King.
ANNA	The next boat that comes to the port of Bangkok – no matter where it goes, I shall be on it. (takes off ring) Give this back to His Majesty.
KRAL	I wish you have never come to Siam!
ANNA	So do I! So do I!



ACT TWO SCENE FIVE

Room in Anna’s house
CHULU	Mother! The Prime Minister told me you were here. I think Mrs Anna and Louis have already left for the boat.
THIANG	No Chula Some of their boxes are still here. The servants said they would be back soon.
CHULU	Mother what is it with my father
THIANG	It is his heart. Also for some time now he does not seem to want to live.
CHULU	Mother I am frightened. I am frightened because I love my father, and also because if he dies, I shall become King and I do not know how to be.
THIANG	Many men learn this after they become Kings.
CHULU	I have been thinking much on the things Mrs Anna used to tell us in classroom. Of slavery, and I think also on what she has said of religion and how it is a good and noble concern that each man find for himself that which is right and that which is wrong.
THIANG	These are good things to remember, my son, and it will be good to remember the one who taught them.
LOUIS	Chulalongkorn.
ANNA	Lady Thiang! How nice of you to come to say goodbye. I was down at the ship seeing that all my boxes were on. Captain Orton must sail with the tide.
THIANG	Mrs Anna, I did not come only to say goodbye. I come for one who must see you. You must come to him. When he heard that you were sailing, he started to write this letter. All day he has been writing. It was very difficult for him, madam – very difficult. He has commanded that I bring it to you.
CHULU	Please to read it to all of us. I would like to hear what my father has said.
ANNA	While I lie here, I know that I die soon. This heart, which you say I have not got, is a matter of concern. There shall be nothing wrong that men shall die, when he shall have tried his utmost best. But I do not wish to die without saying this gratitude etc. etc. etc. But Mrs Anna you must remember that you have been a very difficult woman, and much more difficult than generality! (Tears) I must go to him!

INTERMEDIATE SCENE
THIANG	I will see if he is awake. I will tell him you are here.
LOUIS	Mother, I thought you and the King were very angry with each other.
ANNA	We were Louis
LOUIS	Now he’s dying – does that make you better friends.
ANNA	I suppose so, Louis. We can’t hurt each other any more.
LOUIS	I didn’t know he hurt you.
ANNA	When two people are as different as we are, they are almost bound to hurt each other.
LOUIS	He always frightened me.
ANNA	I wish you had known him better, Louis. You could have been great friends. In some ways he was just as young as you.
LOUIS	Was he as good a King as he could have been
ANNA	Louis, I don’t think any man has ever been as good a King as he could have been….but this one tried. He tried very hard.
LOUIS	You really like him, don’t you, Mother
ANNA	Yes Louis. I like him very much. Very much indeed.

ACT TWO SCENE SIX
The King’s study
KING	Many months, many months I do not see you Mrs Anna. And now I die.
ANNA	Oh no Your Majesty
KING	This is not scientific, Mrs Anna. I know if I do or do not die. You are leaving Siam. When?
ANNA	Very soon, your Majesty. In fact, I can stay only a few minutes more.
KING	You are glad for this. People of Siam, Royal children etc are not glad, and are in great affliction of your departure.
ANNA	I shall miss them.
KING	You shall miss them, but you shall be leaving. I too am leaving. But I am not walking onto a boat with my own feet, of my own free will. I am just….leaving.
Why is your head above mine?
I am not afraid of that which is happening to me.
You teach Chula. Chula teach me – Make believe you brave is good idea, always.
ANNA	You are brave, Your Majesty. You are very brave.
KING	Here is something belonging to you. Put it on. Put it on put it on
Please wear it always.
Oh my children – tell them to come here.	Good evening my children
CHILDREN	Good evening my father. Oh Mrs Anna. Do not go. We are happy to see you. We have been unhappy without you. We have missed you so much Mrs Anna, will you stay. Do not go away.
THIANG	Hush children. Did you come to see your father or Mrs Anna.
KING	It is alright, Lady Thiang. It is suitable.
Was it not said to me that someone had written farewell letter to Mrs Anna.
THIANG	Princess Ying Yaowlak has composed letter to Mrs Anna. She cannot write. She only make up words.
KING	Speak letter now. Say it say it say it.
YING YAO	Dear friend and teacher. My goodness gracious do not go away. We are in great need of you. We are like one blind. Continue good and sincere concern for us and lead us best road. Your loving pupil, Princess Ying Yaowlak.
CHILDREN	Do not leave us. We are afraid without you. We are afraid.
KING	Hush children. When you are afraid, make believe you brave To Anna You tell them how you do. You teach them. Let it be last thing you teach.
CHILDREN	Tell us then, Mrs Anna. What to do when afraid. You teach us.
ANNA	Whenever I feel afraid
I hold my head erect
And whistle a happy tune
So no one will suspect
I’m afraid
While shivering in my shoes
I strike a careless pose
And whistle a happy tune
And no one ever knows
I’m afraid. (Cries)
KING	You see? You make believe you brave, and you whistle. Whistle. You show them
LOUIS	Mother – it’s the boat. It’s time.
CHILDREN	Do not go Mrs Anna. Please do not go.
ANNA	Louis, please go down to the ship and ask Captain Orton to take all our boxes off. And have everything put back into our house.
KING	Silence! Is no reason for doing of this demonstration for schoolteacher realising her duty for which I pay her exorbitant monthly salary of twenty……five pounds. Further this is disorganised behaviour for bedroom of dying King. Chulalongkorn rise. Mrs Anna you take notes. You take notes – from next King. Well well well. Suppose you are King. Is there nothing you would do?
CHULU	I would make proclamations
KING	Yes yes.
CHULU	First I would proclaim for coming New Year – fireworks Also boat races
KING	Boat races? Why would you have boat races with New Year celebrations?
CHULU	I like boat races. And father I would make second proclamation.
KING	Well go on. What is second proclamation? Make it make it.
CHULU	Regarding custom of bowing to King in fashion of lowly toad. I do not believe this is good thing, causing embarrassing fatigue of body, degrading experience for soul etc. etc. etc. This bad thing, I believe. You are angry with me, my Father
KING	Why do you ask question. If you are King you are King. You do not ask question of sick man. Nor of woman! This proclamation against bowing I believe to be your fault!
ANNA	Oh I hope so your Majesty. I do hope so.
CHULU	Up. Rise up.
KING	Up, up, up. Two lines, like monks. It has been said that there shall be no prostration for showing respect of King. It has been said by one who has.….be trained for Royal Government.
CHULU	No bowing like toad. No crouching. No crawling. This does not mean, however, that you do not show respect for king. You will stand with shoulders, square back and chin high. Like this. You will all bow to me – in this way, only bending at the waist.

THE END
Back to The King and I index

